Introduction
============

The Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV) is a
non-commercial public research institution. A legal body under public
law and an autonomous institution, it carries out research activity in
the geophysical disciplines in the field of earthquakes, volcanoes, and
the environment, with the aim of providing research and responsible
innovation while making the research results available to all, in
accordance with the principles reported herein, and fostering
participation by society.

INGV is responsible for the seismic, volcano, and tsunami surveillance
service on the national territory and in the Mediterranean area; it
coordinates the activity of regional and local seismic networks; it
takes part in European and global studies and surveillance networks; it
carries out dissemination activities and promotes communication,
information, and training initiatives in schools and companies for the
purpose of reducing the risk associated with the phenomena connected to
its areas of research; it is a member of the National Civil Protection
Service (Servizio Nazionale di Protezione Civile), as well as a
competence centre at the Department of Civil Protection (Centro di
Competenza del Dipartimento della Protezione Civile), on behalf of which
it maintains operative round-the-clock surveillance activities and
carries out research projects with dedicated objectives in the area of
specific conventions.

INGV has an articulated structure with a strong territorial presence
guaranteed by the “Sections”.

In this setting, the requirement to establish a Data Policy arises from
the need to:

-  Govern the multitude of produced data;

-  Set out the inspiring principles upon which to base a shared
   institutional management of the data;

-  Handle the access, use, and reuse thereof.

Open Access is a fundamental principle for INGV, which carries out a
major role in society. Consistently with this, INGV, aware of the
benefits of Open Access for research in terms of visibility, promotion,
and internationalization, signed the *Position Statement sull’Accesso
Aperto ai risultati della ricerca scientifica in Italia*\  [1]_
(“Position Statement on Open Access to the results of scientific
research in Italy”) in May 2013, committing to the effective realization
of the principles of Open Access, through the adoption of its own Data
Policy.

INGV adopts the Data Policy for allowing open, full, and prompt access
to its data while complying with the principles of Open Access
established in national and EU regulations, and in agreement with INGV’s
institutional purposes, structure, and organization.

The Data Policy establishes guiding documents for:

-  INGV’s personnel;

-  Departments and Sections;

-  National and international bodies that access the produced data in
   the context of institutional activities;

-  Bodies and institutions receiving research products for the purposes
   of surveillance and management of natural risks;

-  Students and researchers for teaching, scientific, and research
   purposes;

-  Companies;

-  Any other party, public or private, or natural or legal person with
   any interest whatsoever in INGV’s data, as defined below.

The set of figures identified above may collectively be referred to as
“stakeholders.”

The development of data management principles, in compliance with the
intellectual property rights and guaranteeing the utmost valorisation
and protection of both researchers and results, responds to the public
interest of society to:

-  Fully access and share the knowledge produced by INGV;

-  Contribute to progress;

-  Foster the free circulation of ideas.

.. [1]
   http://istituto.ingv.it/images/Ufficio_Gestione_Dati/docs/20130321_PositionStatemenAccessoAperto.pdf
